[develop] Add Community Fire Behavior Model (#1139)
ufs-community/ufs-srweather-app: doc/UsersGuide/BuildingRunningTesting/FIRE.rst

.. _UFS_FIRE:

=========================================
Community Fire Behavior Module (UFS FIRE)
=========================================

The `Community Fire Behavior Model (CFBM) <https://ral.ucar.edu/model/community-fire-behavior-model>`_ is a wildland fire model coupled to the UFS Atmospheric Model. The capability to run this code is now available in the UFS Short-Range Weather App for easy use by the community. The `fire_behavior repository <https://github.com/NCAR/fire_behavior>`_ is a :term:`submodule` of the UFS Weather Model (WM), coupled through the :term:`NUOPC` Layer to provide direct feedback between the simulated atmosphere and the simulated fire. More information about the CFBM can be found in the :fire-ug:`CFBM Users Guide <>`.

> The biggest difference between the UFS FIRE capability and other modes of the UFS SRW is that a special build flag is required to build the coupled fire behavior code, as described in the instructions below. Aside from that, additional input files, and some fire-specific config settings, building and running is the same as any other use of SRW.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The biggest difference between the UFS FIRE capability and other modes of the UFS SRW is that a special build flag is required to build the coupled fire behavior code, as described in the instructions below. Aside from that, the need for additional input files, and some fire-specific config settings, configuring and running an experiment is the same as any other use of SRW.
```

.. note::

   Although this chapter is the primary documentation resource for running the UFS FIRE configuration, users may need to refer to :numref:`Chapter %s <BuildSRW>` and :numref:`Chapter %s <RunSRW>` for additional information on building and running the SRW App, respectively. 

Quick Start Guide (UFS FIRE)
=====================================

Download the Code
-------------------

Clone the |branch| branch of the authoritative SRW App repository:

.. code-block:: console

   git clone -b develop https://github.com/ufs-community/ufs-srweather-app
   cd ufs-srweather-app

Checkout Externals
---------------------

Users must run the ``checkout_externals`` script to collect (or "check out") the individual components of the SRW App from their respective GitHub repositories.

.. code-block:: console

   ./manage_externals/checkout_externals

> Build the SRW App with Fire Behavior enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Build the SRW App with Fire Behavior Enabled
```

--------------------------------------------

To build the SRW with fire behavior code, use the following command:

.. code-block:: console

   ./devbuild.sh -p=<machine> -a=ATMF

where ``<machine>`` is ``hera``, ``derecho``, or any other Tier 1 platform. The ``-a`` argument indicates the configuration/version of the application to build; in this case, the atmosphere-fire coupling (ATMF).

If UFS FIRE builds correctly, users should see the standard executables listed in :numref:`Table %s <ExecDescription>`. There are no additional files expected, since the CFBM is coupled to the UFS weather model via the same ``ufs_model`` executable.

Load the |wflow_env| Environment
--------------------------------------------

> Load the python environment for the workflow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Load the appropriate modules for the workflow:
```

This step also loads the Rocoto module.

.. code-block:: console

   module use /path/to/ufs-srweather-app/modulefiles
   module load wflow_<machine>

where ``<machine>`` is ``hera``, ``derecho``, or any other Tier 1 platform. 

If the console outputs a message, the user should run the commands specified in the message. For example, if the output says: 

.. code-block:: console

   Please do the following to activate conda:
       > conda activate srw_app

then the user should run |activate|. Otherwise, the user can continue with configuring the workflow. 

.. _FIREConfig:

Configure Experiment
---------------------------

Users will need to configure their experiment by setting parameters in the ``config.yaml`` file. To start, users can copy an example experiment setting into ``config.yaml``:

.. code-block:: console

   cd ush

>    cp config.fire.yaml config.yaml 

Reviewer: This is no longer necessary, right?

Author: I'd like to keep this as-is; it's a good idea to not work on top of the example file since that is versioned in the repository.

The CFBM creates output files in :term:`netCDF` format, with the naming scheme ``fire_output_YYYY-MM-DD_hh:mm:ss.nc``. In this case the output files are written every 30 minutes (``OUTPUT_DT_FIRE: 1800``).

.. note::

  Any of the settings under :fire-ug:`the ``&fire`` section of the namelist <Configuration.html#fire>` can be specified in the SRW App ``config.yaml`` file under the ``fire:`` section, not just the settings described above. However, any additional settings from ``namelist.fire`` will need to be added to ``config_defaults.yaml`` first; otherwise the check for valid SRW options will fail.

Generate the Workflow
------------------------

Generate the workflow:

.. code-block:: console

>    ./generate_FV3LAM_wflow.py

Reviewer: This gets a command line argument now, no?

Author: It's not mandatory so I don't want to clutter up this specific doc too much, but I will update the docs elsewhere for this new option.

   202008131800    run_post_mem000_f005                     6498433           SUCCEEDED                   0         1          77.0
   202008131800    run_post_mem000_f006                     6498435           SUCCEEDED                   0         1          74.0
   202008131800    integration_test_mem000                     6498434           SUCCEEDED                   0         1          27.0

In addition to the standard UFS and UPP output described elsewhere in this users guide, the UFS_FIRE runs produce additional output files :numref:`described above <FIREConfig>`:

.. code-block:: console

   $ cd /path/to/expt_dir/experiment
   $ ls 2020081318/fire_output*
   fire_output_2020-08-13_18:00:00.nc  fire_output_2020-08-13_19:30:00.nc  fire_output_2020-08-13_21:00:00.nc  fire_output_2020-08-13_22:30:00.nc
   fire_output_2020-08-13_18:30:00.nc  fire_output_2020-08-13_20:00:00.nc  fire_output_2020-08-13_21:30:00.nc  fire_output_2020-08-13_23:00:00.nc
   fire_output_2020-08-13_19:00:00.nc  fire_output_2020-08-13_20:30:00.nc  fire_output_2020-08-13_22:00:00.nc  fire_output_2020-08-13_23:30:00.nc

>    These files contain output directly from the fire model (hence why they are at a greater frequency), including variables such as the fire perimeter and area, smoke emitted, and fuel percentage burnt. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   These files contain output directly from the fire model (hence the greater frequency), including variables such as the fire perimeter and area, smoke emitted, and fuel percentage burned. 
```
